# OS Lecture8: Virtual Memory


-------
## background 
#### 功能
具有

* 请求调页    
* 置换功能    

能从逻辑上对内存容量加以扩充的的一种存储器系统  

#### 特点

* 多次性：一个作业被多次装入内存运行   
* 对换性：  允许进程在进程运行的过程中，（部分）被换入/出
* 虚拟性： 逻辑扩充

#### 好处  

* 页面共享
不同进程，逻辑页框号不一样，但物理页框号肯定是一样的
* 共享内存  
* 加速进程创建的效率  
* 允许更多的进程同时执行（提高了道数）

## demand paging  
不用全部装入实存
只需要在需要的时候，在访问具体页面的时候，才装入  

请调：  
首先在页表中看在不在，    
如果是invalid,则给一个page not found错误  
如果valid,但只是不在实际内存，则换入，然后改变页表（改成在实存中）  

预调：根据经验事先调入一些  

swapper vs pager(以页为单位的lazy swapper)  

###Basic Concepts  

#### the modified page table mechanism

* valid bit: v--in memory i--not in memory    
if i  ===> page fault ==intepret=> 换入  
* reference bit :标示页面访问情况  
* dirty/modified bit: 记录页面是否被修改，如修改-->写会，如没修改-->不写回 提高了效率。**换出的时候要看是否被修改，然后看是否需要写回**。  





#### page fault
first reference to a page wiil trap to OS

##### page fault handling  

* OS look at an internal table to decide    
  --invalid reference => abort   
  --just not in memory => bring to memory    
* get an empty frame from the free frame list    
* swap page into frame   
  --page out/in  
* modify the internal tables & set validation bit    
* **restart** the instruction that caused the page fault   


#### address translation   
#### secondary memory  

### Performance of Demand paging   

EAT:  effective access time
p:  page fault rate 

EAT = (1-P) * memory access + p * page fault time 

page fault time = page fault overhead + swap page out(optional) + swap page in + restart overhead  

why is swap out time optional?
* can find a free frame 
* though can't find free frame,but **its dirty bit show it has  not been modified ,then need not be written back**  

### Page Replacement  
如果没有free frame怎么办？  
find some pages in memory,but really not in use,swap it out  

#### Basic page replacement
* find the location of the desired page on disk  
* find a free frame  
-- if there is,use it
-- if not,use a page replacement algorithm to select a victim frame  
* bring the desired page into the (newly) free frame;update the page and the frame tables  
* restart the process  

处于缺页中断时，该进程处于阻塞状态  



> How do we select a particular replacement algorithm?   

In general, we want the one with the **lowest page-fault rate**.  

          We evaluate an algorithm by running it on a particular string of memory references and computing the number of page faults. The string of memory references is called a reference string.  

          Obviously, as the number of frames available increases, the number of page faults decreases.. Of course, adding physical memory increases the number of frames.
          
> example 7, 0, 1, 2, 0, 3, 0, 4, 2, 3, 0, 3, 2, 1, 2, 0, 1, 7, 0, 1 .for a memory with three frames  

<font color=red>注意题目问的是replace次数，还是page fault的次数</font>  

#### FIFO replacement algorithm  
We can create a FIFO queue to hold all pages in memory.
We replace the page at the head of the queue. When a page is brought into memory, we insert it at the tail of the queue  
         
         eg:For our example reference string, our three frames are initially empty. The first three references (7, 0, 1) cause page faults and are brought into these empty frames. The next reference (2) replaces page 7, because page 7 was brought in first. Since 0 is the next reference and 0 is already in memory, we have no fault for this reference. The first reference to 3 results in replacement of page 0, since it is now first in line. Because of this replacement, the next reference, to 0, will fault. Page 1 is then replaced by page 0. This process continues as shown in Figure 9.12. Every time a fault occurs, we show which pages are in our three frames. There are fifteen faults altogether.

##### Belady’s anomaly  
for some page-replacement algorithms, the page-fault rate may increase as the number of allocated frames increases.**只有FIFO会出现这种现象,后面的算法都不会出现**   


#### Optimal replacement algorithm  
the algorithm that has the lowest page-fault rate of all algorithms and will never suffer from **Belady’s anomaly**    
Replace the page that will not be used for the longest period of time   
  
         eg:For example, on our sample reference string, the optimal page-replacement algorithm would yield nine page faults  
         The first three references cause faults that fill the three empty frames. The reference to page 2 replaces page 7, because page 7 will not be used until reference 18, whereas page 0 will be used at 5, and page 1 at 14. The reference to page 3 replaces page 1, as page 1 will be the last of the three pages in memory to be referenced again. With only nine page faults, optimal replacement is much better than a FIFO algorithm, which results in fifteen faults. (If we ignore the first three, which all algorithms must suffer, then optimal replacement is twice as good as FIFO replacement.) In fact, no replacement algorithm can process this reference string in three frames with fewer than nine faults.

实现困难，一般做标杆，来衡量其他算法的好坏。  

#### LRU replacement algorithm  
LRU replacement associates with each page the time of that page’s last use.  
When a page must be replaced, LRU chooses the page that has not been used for the longest period of time.We can think of this strategy as the optimal page-replacement algorithm looking backward in time, rather than forward.   
Like optimal replacement, LRU replacement does not suffer from Belady’s anomaly
      
eg: [LRU replacement algorithm example](https://postimg.cc/image/wwdf1qynp/)   


